Hi everyone, I'm Anders Hallberg,
Technical Fellow in the Developer
Division of Microsoft. I'm here
to talk about a new project of
ours called TypeScript.
I'm sure you've all noticed that
JavaScript has gone through
explosive growth over the
last five years or so.
We have gotten much better JavaScript
execution environments
like the Chakra engine and IE9 and
IE10, Google's V8. We've got
HTML5 that actually has made the
UI really be a very full fledged
programming platform.
But the fact remains that writing
application scale JavaScript
is hard.
JavaScript was really never designed
to be a programming language
for big applications. It's a scripting
language. It doesn't
have static typing, but more importantly
perhaps it lacks some
of the structuring mechanisms that
you need in large applications
like classes and modules,
and perhaps interfaces.
So two or three years ago when
we were trying to decide where
to go next with JavaScript development
tools, we sort of took
a look around and we've noticed that
a lot of people in the industry,
in order to write large JavaScript
apps use tools like maybe
Google's GWT or Script Sharp which
is an open source project
that uses C#.
Common to those is that they leverage
mature tooling eco systems
like Eclipse or Visual Studio, and
give you development processes
that work for large apps. In that
sense it's a step forward to
use those tools. But the problem
is that you end up writing your
app in a language that isn't JavaScript.
Whenever you want to
leverage anything that happens in
the JavaScript community you
have to first go and capsulate
it or do whatever. So you're
sort of at an arm's length distance
at all times from the eventual
thing that you're targeting.
So we felt that, what if we could
strengthen JavaScript with
the things that are missing for large
scale application development,
like static typing, classes, modules.
That's what TypeScript is about.
It's a language for writing application
scale JavaScript applications.
Maybe in a little more detail,
TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript
that compiles to plain JavaScript.
So the thing that you end up running
when you're using TypeScript
is just JavaScript.
A compiler and a compile code work
in any browser on any OS,
in any host. The compiler and
all of the libraries everything
is all open source.
So TypeScript starts with JavaScript.
Basically all JavaScript
code is TypeScript code.
In fact our compiler passes I believe
close to, if not 100% of
the Test 262 Tests.
So you can simply copy and paste JavaScript
code into a TypeScript
source file.
Also, all JavaScript libraries
like Node, jQuery, underscore,
backbone, prototype, etcetera,
etcetera. Work directly with
TypeScript because it is just JavaScript
with some additions.
Those additions are optional static
types, classes, and modules.
Those really are in my mind the
underpinnings for application
scale development. Those are the
things that are missing, if
you will, when you're writing large
apps and trying to structure
them and maintain them, and so forth.
But the beauty of this is
that it's zero cost.
All of those additional features compile
away in the resulting JavaScript.
So there's actually no cost to using
these classes or modules.
They simply compile to normal JavaScript
idioms. That resulting
JavaScript runs, as I said in any
browser, on any host, on any OS.
Alright, so let's take a look at
what that looks like. I'm going
to start with a
demo of the TypeScript type system.
So let me first
paste in a little piece of
JavaScript code here.
This is just plain JavaScript.
You see a function that takes
an argument and assigns to a property
of that argument, and also
produce, computes the sum, and
brings up a message box.
Now there's something funny about this
code. It likely wouldn't work.
I mean you're putting a property on
it and you also try to add it.
So it seems a little suspect, but
certainly in here if I hover
you can see that TypeScript has
just determined that X is of
type any because it doesn't know
any better. Any is basically
the type that represents any value
in JavaScript. So anything
can go into X. Therefore you can
access any property on X, you
can do any operation on X, and
you can pass X as an argument
to any function you care to. But
let's say that you intend for
X here to be a string, for example.
What would you do? Well, there
are already tools out there if
you take for example Google's Closure
that allows you to add
annotations that look like this.
Where you say add param and you
say that X is of type string,
and you can also add some
documentation for X here.
If you think about it that's really like
a type system in comments, right.
But it's a little problematic to have
your type system in comments
because it's not particularly
expressive. You know when you
get into structured types and types
that depend on other types,
and so forth, it get's rather unwieldy.
Also it doesn't look
all that great in the code so it
sort of hampers readability.
In TypeScript
we instead allow you to simply put
annotations on your parameter.
So here I can annotate X and
say it's of type string.
When I do that you see that things
start to light up. For example,
we're now being told here that there's
no name property on string.
Because we know that string doesn't
have such a property and
therefore we can flag an error.
Let me try to get rid of that line.
Let's try one of the other primitive
types like number.
Now we see another error. Well,
first of all we actually see
that when I have two X's I get
another X. So we've inferred
that V is a type number.
When we try to pass a number
to alert we get an error.
Because if we look at
what the prototype for alert is
it's says that it needs to take
a string.
Let's try the last of the primitive
types of JavaScript bool.
Now you'll note that we get an error
on the plus operation because
you can't apply operator plus to
two bools. While technically
you can do anything you want in JavaScript,
but you're not going
to get a meaningful result. Therefore
we flag it. So this is
all about in a sense defining a
semantic subset of JavaScript.
The subset that makes sense, because
JavaScript allows you to
do a lot of nonsensical things and
those are the ones we're trying
to catch here.
We can also do structure types.
Let's say that we say X is a
string array. Now if I say X subzero.,
you'll see that we get
statement completion with all of
the methods of string. So we
know that we're dealing with an array
and you can index into it.
You could also for example say
that string is a, oops, X is a
function that returns a string.
Now if we call X the
result is a string.
But perhaps more importantly
you can say that X is a type that
has a number property and a
string property called A and B,
and now if I dot on X we see
that there's an A property
and a B property.
Now we might for example here change
our code to say return X.A.
Now you can see here that types
can be just written in place.
We actually have a structural
type system in TypeScript.
But you can also give types names.
So we might for example
insert a type declaration of an interface,
which is just a name,
the name that we give object
types, called thing.
Now we could modify our code here
to say that X is of type thing.
You'll see that we still get the
same statement, oops, the same
statement completion,
there's an A and a B.
Let's try to write a line of code
that actually calls this.
So we'll pass,
so we'll call the process function
passing in an object literal
with an A and a B.
Let's look at a few things here.
Well, first of all you see
that we've declared A to be of
type number. Therefore X.A is
of type number and since we return
a number and we don't have
a type annotation on the return
type of our functions, we infer
that process is a function that takes
a thing and returns a number.
Since we're assigning that to N well
then in turn N is of type number.
So you see the types flow here through
a process called type inference.
We can actually infer a whole lot
of types without you having
to write them.
The other thing you see is that
interfaces are structural.
So as long as you have the right
members of the interface, in
this case a number, an A and a B property
of type number and string.
Well then you can write an object literal
that satisfies that interface.
Let's try to add an extra
member here for example, C: bool.
We'll see now that we get an error
down here because we're missing
C from our object literal. Of course
we could go add it and that
would make the compiler happy. But
what we could also do instead
is we could say that C is an optional
property, meaning that
you don't have to specify it. It
is still there, so if we look
on X here you'll see that
there's a C property.
But whenever you use it you need to
first check if it's undefined,
because it may have not been given
to you. If you do give it
down here things are of course
happy. But interestingly, if
you give a C property but of the
wrong type then again that's
an error, so if a C is there it
must be a bool, is really what
we've said.
Okay, now of course you can also
have functions in interfaces.
Let's add a foo function. Now we'll
note down here that we now
have a foo. We now get statement completion
of foo takes a string.
So I could give it a string and
it returns a string. So now
the compiler has inferred that
this guy returns string.
In fact
if I add
another argument here
you'll also note that
we complain if you're not passing the
right arguments to your function.
But just like properties you can
make arguments optional.
So in here is now an optional argument.
Now you can either not
give it or give it and we're happy.
In fact, in addition to optional parameters
we also support overloading.
So I could declare foo
to have two possible ways you can
call it, either passing in
a string in which case it returns
a string, or you could pass
in a number in which case it returns
a number. Now down here
we have one that calls the string
version. But if you look you'll
see that there are now two, there
are two options here available.
I could also pass it a number and
in that case we now infer that
our function returns numbers. So
we can do overload resolution
on this stuff.
Okay, of course it's not really
possible in JavaScript to have
multiple implementations of foo.
There's only one and what we're
really just saying here is in that
implementation it is up to
the user to ensure that if you give
it a string it should return
a string, and so forth. So we're not
actually necessarily enforcing
all of this. But we're allowing you
to write the correct modeling
of it.
The overloads I just wrote actually
correspond to this.
What we're really saying is there's
a foo property that has two
call signatures, one taking a string,
and one taking a number.
I could also add data properties
to my foo here. For example,
I could say there's also a property
called data of type any.
Now if I use foo, well you'll see
that it has two overloads and
a data property. This is entirely
possible in JavaScript.
You can put properties on function
objects and that's really
what I'm describing here in
this type declaration.
Indeed we really allow you to model
anything that's possible
in JavaScript here. I have now
said that my thing also has a
constructor function that takes a
string and returns an element.
If you index my thing then you
get dates out of it. So now I
might be, for example say new X
of ABC and then that returns
an element. So now I get statement
completion for element or
I could say return X stop zero. and
now you see that I have dates
in my X. Now you're going to go
that is a very strange object
that I've defined here. Indeed this
would not occur in the wild.
But combinations of all of these
features do occur in the wild
and all over the DOM, for example.
TypeScript basically stays
very true to JavaScripts type system
and just allows you to statically
describe anything that goes on
in JavaScript. That's really
what the point is here.
Okay, let me
next try
to show you another little
example of type inference.
Here's another JavaScript function
that uses a very common pattern
where you declare a local variable.
Then you write a bunch of
local functions that close over the
local variables and you return
a little object that has all of those
local functions as properties.
This happens all over the
place in JavaScript.
You can see that from this piece
of code the only thing that
I've added to this over standard
JavaScript is an annotation
here that annotates this argument
to be of type number.
Other than that it's just plain
JavaScript. Yet from this we
can infer a whole bunch of stuff.
For example, the compiler
here has inferred that the return
statement. Returns an object
that has three functions, one call
clear, one call add, one call
result, and it's figured out what
their types are. So it's also
figured out that make accumulator
is a function that takes no
arguments that returns an object
that has those three functions
in it. So it knows everything
already.
I might here then say bar A equals
make accumulator. Now when
I say A., you see that we now know that
there are those three methods.
I can call them; pass a number,
etcetera, etcetera.
So that's in a sense inference going
in one direction where we
infer from your code what the types
are. But sometimes it goes
in the other direction.
You might for example,
somewhere have a declaration of
an accumulator interface that
you are suppose to go implement now.
Let's say that this is my function
that implements it. In that
case I would typically say my function
returns accumulator.
Now we check in the other direction.
So you see no errors show
up because this is actually an implementation
of that interface.
But let's say I had mistyped something
and now we get an error
because this isn't of the correct
type. This is super valuable
in JavaScript programming. Imagine
that you had a 200 line object
literal that you're returning here and
there's something wrong somewhere.
But you're just staring at these 200
lines. Well we will tell you.
Okay, another place where that type
of inference is super useful
is when you're writing event handlers.
So let's say in here
I'm writing
an on mouse move event handler. So
equals function of E and then
E dot. You'll notice that we know
what the type of E is here.
We know that it's a mouse event and
it has a client X and a client
Y, and so forth. So we can give you
statement completion on this
stuff without you having said
anything at all really.
Because if you hover you see that
we've inferred that it's a
mouse event. The reason we've inferred
that is that Window declares
a mouse event, event.
Now we could actually use the ID
to navigate to that declaration.
So we can go to definition on mouse
move. Now we jump into a
file called lib.D.sturb, which is
the declaration file for the
entire DOM and all of JavaScript
standard runtime libraries,
about 8,000 lines of declarations
in here. These are basically
just the interface declarations of
everything that's in JavaScript.
I don't think anyone can memorize
these 8,000 things, but the
compiler can and just present it
to you whenever you need it.
That's what makes this super valuable.
For example, if we go
to mouse event here we can just navigate
around in here and find
the declarations of everything.
You can even modify this file
if you're in a different browser that has
different additional capabilities.
Okay so that's a quick tour through
the type system. Let me
just summarize here. That what TypeScript
does is it basically
formalizes a static type system that describes
JavaScript's dynamic types.
But it describes them at development
time and then it can offer
excellent tooling on top
of that information.
You see that we do a lot of type
inference and structural typing.
It's actually remarkable how few
type annotations you need to
add to your code to get all
this machinery working.
TypeScript works with existing
JavaScript libraries. You saw
that you can write declaration files
separately from the libraries
that you're trying to provide static
typing for. So things like
Node, jQuery, prototype, underscore,
well some of them we've
already written the declaration
files. But anyone can write
these declaration files and once you
do the whole system lights up.
Final thing, this type system is
not provably type safe. If you
talk to the type theorists, but then
again most type systems aren't.
Like C is not provably type safe
either, but what it allows you
to do though is allows you to state
the intent in your code,
and have the tools check it for
you. But once you compile, all
of that goes away and it's just
JavaScript. It'll do whatever
JavaScript would do when you write
the particular code. So we're
just aiding you at development time.
Okay, so let's try and take a look
at some of the other features
in TypeScript that allows you to do
structuring of larger applications.
I'm going to go to Chrome and just
show that TypeScript works
in any browser. I'm going to go
to our playground. A playground
is a place where you can type in
TypeScript code and see the
translation into JavaScript. So
we're going to take a look at
that here.
I'm going to start by
typing a class point.
Then in my point I'm going to
declare X: number and Y: number.
So two fields X and Y, and then I'm
going to make myself a point,
oops, new point.
There and now you'll notice that
when I type P. I get statement
completion on my point. There's
an X and Y member, so I can say
P.X equals ten, and P.Y
equals 20, for example.
If you look at the code you'll see
that we've just produced idiomatic
JavaScript here. We've produced a
function closure that contains
the constructor function and
that's what we return out.
Now, typically you
would want to have
the ability to pass arguments to
your constructor. For example,
you would probably want to say
give X and Y for my point.
You'll note that we complain here
that we say well this doesn't
match the supply parameters. Well
because we haven't written
a constructor yet. But let's
write one, so constructor of X:
number, Y: number.
In here we will say this.
and again you'll see that we know
that this has two fields X
and Y. So this .X equals
X, this .Y equals Y.
Now this class syntax here is very
aligned with ECMAScript 6
proposal for classes.
Of course on top of it we've added
type annotations. That's what
TypeScript adds, but we in all
of our additional features are
working hard to align with ECMAScript
6, as even as that standard
moves things will probably change
here as well. So you see in
here how we now initialize X and
Y on our object. We can of
course also write methods. Let's
write a distance method that
returns the length of the vector
given by our point.
So square root of this .X times
so this .X plus this .Y
times this .Y,
like so. Now if we go down here
you'll see that if I say P.
we get statement completion that
there's a dist function that
returns a number. If you look at
the generated code you'll notice
that we initialized properties
on the instance of point, but
we put methods on the prototype,
a point and that is precisely
what ES6's class proposal
does as well.
We actually support Accessors properties
too. So if you're running
in an ECMAScript 5 compatible browser
you might want dist to
be a property instead of a function.
You can do that just by
making it into an accessor and
you'll see that the generated
code then shifts around and all
of a sudden now it becomes an
object.define property of dist.
You'll notice that in statement
completion we now have a distance
property not a method, there.
We also allow you to declare static
properties, static origin
equals new point zero, zero for example.
You'll note that in our generated
JavaScript, static properties
go on the constructor function object,
methods go on the prototype,
properties go on the instance. So
we put everything where it's
supposed to go in JavaScript. In
fact, now if we look you'll
see the point now has two members.
There's the prototype that
is on every constructor function
and there's the origin static
member that we just introduced,
which is itself a point.
In fact if you hover over point
here you'll see that we know
the type, point here references
the constructor function.
It has a point prop, an origin property,
and a calls, a constructor signature.
Then point also is a type, the type
of P. So there are two points
in there, a constructor function
and an instance type. We also
support private members.
Let me try to add a private caller:
string here.
You'll note then that inside the
class I now have a caller member
of type string. So
I can say caller =
red, but outside the class
there is no color.
So privacy is basically the ability to
restrict access to certain members.
But again this restriction if you
look at a generated code there's
really nothing special about color.
So this is all about stating
and enforcing your intent at development
time, but producing
normal idiomatic JavaScript. So
there is no notion of private
properties in JavaScript and so we
generate the best we can here.
Now with ECMAScript 6 and private
member, or private names we
may be able to do a better job,
and once that comes online we
can retarget or have a compiler
option to do that.
Okay a
couple of other nice features you
notice that this pattern of
declaring properties X and Y, and
then initializing them in a
constructor is very, very common.
We actually have some syntactic
sugar that allows you to shorten
that. So I can get rid of those
and then I can just declare automatic properties
in my constructor arguments.
You get the same effect here that
we automatically declare a
property called X and initialize
it with the X that you gave
to the constructor. In fact we support
for functions and constructors
default values, which is another
ECMAScript 6 feature. So you
can give the default value here,
zero for example. You'll note
that we generate code that puts
that default value into your
argument if the values weren't given.
Now the type checker also
knows that it is not an error to
omit the arguments from the
constructor call. Now classes of
course also support inheritance.
Let's try to write a derive
class, class point
3D extends point. Let's just pause
here because a whole bunch
of code got generated for that.
Let's take a look at that.
You see again that we have a point
3D but since it is a derived
class we now pass in a base class
as a super argument in our
function closure. Then we call a
helper function extends, which
we inject into the generator code
only if you have derived classes.
I should say that this is the only
time we will inject code into
your generated JavaScript, other
than the code that you wrote.
Here we then you know do whatever
gymnastics is necessary to
set up the prototype chain.
Then automatically we emit a call
to the base class constructor
if you don't actually write a constructor
yourself. But let's
try to write one here where
we say for example
our constructor has, whoop, there,
I don't think I got that right,
did I? Oops, a; there, my constructor
has an X and a Y and then
a public Z member. Then inside
my constructor let's just call
the base class constructor
like so with a super call.
I can also in here put in, for example,
an override of the dist method.
I might save R D = super.dist,
so called the
inherited method. Then return math.sqrt
of D x D + this .Z x this
.Z, for example.
So classes with inheritance, let
me try and show some of the
other features that are in here.
In fact let me just go grab
a little code snippet from
over here and paste it in.
Here's a little class called tracker
that has one property in
it called count. Then it has a method
that starts it and in the
method we just attach an on mouse
move event handler, where we
handle all the mouse moves. For
every mouse move we increment
our counter and write it
out to the console.
Let's try to run this code.
Let's try to bring up the F12 tools
and look at the console window.
We'll see that there's something
going on in here. We're just
getting a bunch of NaNs. So
something went wrong.
The thing that went wrong is the
thing that goes wrong very often
in JavaScript, which is you
have the wrong this.
When Window. on mouse move calls
your event handler it passes
the element that you're over as
the dist pointer. It doesn't
pass the place that you were defined.
Now if we had actually typed this code
in we would have discovered that.
Because if I hover over this here,
you'll see that this is of
type any.
We wouldn't have gotten statement
completion and whatever.
So you know we would have noticed
but let's say we hadn't.
Now this is so common in JavaScript
that in ECMAScript 6 there's
a proposal to introduce what's called
arrow functions, or also
known as lambdas from languages
like C#, for example.
[Laughter]
And they use the fat arrow syntax.
So I could instead write
my function here or my event handler
as an E arrow and then the
same code. Now the thing that's
different about arrow functions
is that they have lexically scoped
this, which means they have
the same this as their surrounding
function. The way that you
make that work is you have to capture
that out of this and then
reference it inside.
People often write = that = this
and then inside their method
they use that. instead of this.
but you notice that we can just
do that automatically for you.
We can emit that code.
Now if I run you'll see
that my sample now
hopefully works, yes. I'm actually
working on the correct this.
If you look at the generator code
you'll see that we captured
the outer this and then rewrote all
of the references to be that
outer this instead. The thing that's
interesting by the way is
that we will only generate that
if there are references to the
outer this, so notice what happens here
if I get, if I backspace here.
It disappears because I'm no longer
referencing the outer this
in my lambda, so we'll only generate
these closures if we actually
need to, to generate them.
So that's arrow functions. Another
feature that we have in TypeScript
that's inspired by ECMAScript
6 is modules. Let me start by
showing you what we call internal
modules, which are modules
that are local in a source file.
I could for example create
a module utils and put my tracker
class into that module, like so.
Then I could export my tracker out
of that module. You'll notice
that the code we generate is a
function closure that contains
our class declaration. Then we assign
all of the exported properties
onto the object that represents
the module. This is very common
pattern in JavaScript. Of course
now you'll see that our tracker
isn't there, but it is indeed
now inside the utils module.
I can actually sort of nest arbitrarily,
well I should mention
that modules are open ended. So
I could write another module
utils here with an export = bar
greeting = hello, for example. Now
you'll note that if I say utils.
there's now two members on it. There's
a greeting and a tracker.
But imagine that these two modules
were in separate source files.
So modules are in a sense also
namespaces that are open ended
and different source files can contribute
members to these modules.
The code we generate allows
you to do that.
I might also for example
deeply nest something. You'll notice
that we generate then multiple
function closures. Now of course
this thing ends up with a
very sort of unwieldy name.
But if I hover you'll notice that
we know that this guys an Acme
core utils tracker.
I could shorten the name by using
an import. So I could = say
import ACU = Acme.core.,
oops, .utils.
Then in my reference here just reference
Acm.tracker, for example.
Over here you'll note in the generated
JavaScript an import is
simply just a local variable that
references that inner module.
So that's internal modules. The
other kind of module we support
are external modules.
Now to demo those let me,
not save that, then
let me go and grab
a blank file called server.ts here.
External modules we support two models
for external modules based
either CommonJS modules or AMD
modules. So CommonJS modules
are the types of modules used by
Node.js, and basically a module
in Node or in CommonJS is
a JavaScript source file.
A module loader arranges to load
that module along with all of
its other requirements. Then you can
export members out of that module.
Then there's AMD modules which are
built on top of CommonJS to
provide an asynchronous module definition
for modules in the browser.
We support generating code
for both of those.
Let me show what it looks like. I'm
going to try to write a little
multi-module Node application. I'm
going to have a server module
and a hello module that uses my
simple server module. So in
my Simple Server module
I'm going to start
by referencing
the static types for Node.js.
The way I do that is I
just simply put a reference
in my file.
Now I can actually navigate to
this file. In here you see the
static types that are
declared for Node.js.
Including for example, yeah, zlib, HTTP,
etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.
Okay in here I might = then say
import HTTP = module up HTTP,
like so. Now I actually have a reference
to the HTTP module from Node.
Then I might write an exported function,
export function simple
server port:, oops, number,
message: string.
In my Simple Server maybe I'm going
to do something with HTTP.
You see here now we get statement
completion on the HTTP module
and Node. So I can call HTTP.create
server. It tells me well
in Node create server takes
a call back that
requires a request and
a response parameter.
Now in here I can say response.,
and again you'll see that we
have picked up what the types of
those are from the definition
of the create server module. So lots
of type inference happening
here that automatically
flows the types.
Let me just, so you don't have
to watch me type it here.
Let me just paste in the code that
I want in my server. I simply
want to write out a hello
world message.
Then finally I want to start the
server by calling its listen
method, and again here you see we
get statement completion on that.
So we'll just listen on the port
that we give. Now I have a
super simple little module that
has one function exported in
it called simple server.
So, next let's try to
grab another empty file
here called hello.
Then let's try to use the simple
server that we just wrote.
So I'm = going to say import
server = module of./server.
So now I import the module that I
just wrote. Then automatically
I get statement completion on
the code that I just wrote.
So that has automatically become
part of my compilation here.
Now I can say listen on ports
1337, and the message is
greetings channel 9 for, example. Finally,
let's just say console.log
up listening, there and save that. So
here we have our two module project.
Let's go to the directory where
I put these files. You'll see
that we have hello on server.ts and
the static typings for Node.
We can now use the TypeScript compiler,
whoops, to compile hello.ts.
You'll note here that I don't have
to give it all of the files.
It will automatically figure out the
dependencies from the imports
that I had and a triple/references.
So we automatically just, you just
give us the top file and we
figure out what everything is. You'll
note in here now that we
have two JavaScript files, hello.js
and server.js. We could
even look at for example, our hello
file. You'll note that it
is very, very simple to what I type
my module import has turned
into a require, but other than that
it's the same code. I'm good
to go now, I can start my hello app.
Now let's go to,
let's see local host 1337.
Here's our little greeting from
our little Node server, so very
simple stuff.
Okay, let me just summarize here.
Classes and modules basically are
the building blocks that allow
you to do scalable application development
in TypeScript, because
they enable you to define and maintain
clear contracts between
different parts of your application.
We're working very hard
to align with the emerging standards
for this stuff. So class,
module, arrow function, syntaxes
are all borrow from the current
ECMAScript 6 proposals. We will
continue to align with that.
You saw that we support the popular
module systems that are already
in use in the industry like
CommonJS and AMD. Let me now for
the final little section of
demos here, show you some of this
application scale in action.
So we're going to go back to Visual
Studio here. Let's try to
pick up another file.
We have one of our samples is
called Image Board. I'm going
to load the main application in
Image Board here. You'll notice
that this is a Node application,
we reference Node. It also
uses MongoDB and it uses Express
with Node. So there's a database
module that I wrote here. I can
go to definition on that guy.
You'll see that my database module
is a wrapping around Node.
So I can go in and actually look
at the static typings for Node.
These are not entirely complete
yet. This is stuff that's still
in flight, but you get the idea.
In my database module here you'll
note that we use the Node APIs.
But we also declare some interfaces
that represent the data entities
that I'm storing in my database.
That actually ends up being
very, very convenient. Because now
whenever I use the entities
I just automatically get stickman
completion on what the properties
of those guys are. So we have users,
boards, images you can see.
Then we have some accessor functions
like get user. That just
wraps around the, you know necessary calls
to put them into MongoDB table.
I could actually do a find all
references on my get user here
and see all the places in my app
that I'm using this method.
You'll note that there's the place
where I declared. But then
there are two places in the
app where I call get user.
Let's go to this one here for example.
You'll note here that
we actually are tracking all of these
different modules. So there's
an app module which is actually
came from Express, the Express
module, I'm sorry there's an app
object which came from Express,
and is of type Express server. There's
request and response parameters
that came from Express.
There's a user
parameter that came from the database
encapsulation that I wrote.
In here if I reference user.
you'll see that I get statement
completion on the types that
I just wrote in my database encapsulation.
Let's try to just look at what
it looks like to run this guy.
So here's the code. We could
compile it app.ts, here.
We'll look, that produced a couple
of JavaScript files, one for
app and one for the database. We
could then start up MongoDB
in a separate process here. Then
we can start up Node on our app.
Then go to Port 3000
on our local host.
Here you see the Image Board example
and it's basically a little
app that allows you to pin up pictures
and some collections.
You can have different users and they
can each pin up different stuff.
Here's another one for Lukeh,
Lukeh likes flowers.
We can add new... We can add new
pins, etcetera, etcetera.
So a simple little app, but it shows
you, you know multiple modules
running on the Node.
Okay another app I wanted
to show is an
app called Warship, here we go.
This is an app that uses jQuery
and it also uses JQuery UI.
If you look at the static typings here
you see that we just reference
the declaration files for jQuery
and jQuery UI. If we go into
our solution explorer, one thing
that actually I haven't even
gotten around to mentioning yet, if
I just get rid of these guys here.
Is that we automatically infer
projects. So when you open a
file pretty much anywhere, I closed
2R5, sorry. Because Warship
references jQuery and jQuery UI,
you see that we automatically
infer a project consisting of the Warship
file, and the two declaration
files, and the one that declares
everything for the DOM.
We do that by traversing all of the
references that are in there,
and that a module imports and exports,
and then finding the entire
app automatically. So you can sort
of start anywhere and you
automatically are in the right project
context. Now if we look
at jQuery, in fact one way
to look at is just to
type in $,
that's the jQuery object you see
that we get statement completion
for all of the various things
you can pass to it. Let's say
$ of div. and then you see all
of the jQuery methods like at
class for example. Now we can actually
go to the declaration
of that. You'll see that we are
now in the jQuery module and
here's the at class method, in fact
there are two of them, it's
overloaded, and I can take different
arguments. But this gives
you the static types for jQuery.
But then the really interesting
thing is that jQuery UI builds
on top of jQuery by adding new
members to $.
In fact we could look at $ of div.draggable.
If we go to definition of that
guy you'll note that that's in
a different file, that's in jQuery
UI, which declares additional
members in the same interface.
So in TypeScript's type system
interfaces are open ended and multiple
entities can contribute
to an interface. That allows us
to accurately model what very
often happens in JavaScript, which
is that one library builds
on another by adding new members to its
global object, or its representation.
Okay, let's
try to go
here and just quickly compile
the Warship app.
Then let's try to run it.
This is basically like battleships
in here. I can, you know
start shooting and let's see if I,
oh yeah, oh well I got a couple
of good hits in already.
Basically you know you can
have fun with that app.
Okay last thing I wanted to show is
the TypeScript compiler itself,
which TypeScript is written in TypeScript.
Since its open source
we actually give you the entire
source code for the compiler.
Let me try to go load up some
of it in compiler. We'll just
grab a random file, AST.
This so happens to be the file that
defines the abstract syntax
trees for everything. So we can
go look at, here's the class
that represents K statements in
the compiler. You'll note that
I just grab one file out of the
compiler, but we have already
inferred the entire solution for
the compiler because we follow
all the references. So if you go
up here and you note that we
referenced TypeScript.ts and if
we go open that file here.
You'll see that that's the main
compiler file, which in turn
references all sorts of other files,
and by tracing those we
automatically see the whole picture.
The TypeScript compiler declares a
class call TypeScript compiler.
We could try to look it up. Here you
see that the compiler instantiates
a parser. So we can go look at
a parser. The parser in turn
instantiates a scanner, this is
very nicely layered compiler.
In the scanner there's a property
called line, which is the current
line number that the scanner is processing.
Now we can find all references
to line in here.
Here you see that well there are
a bunch of references in the
scanner itself. But there are also
some over in the parser that
references that property.
Now here in particular there's
one interesting reference.
If you look here we're referencing
scanner.line, but above it
we're also referencing a .line
property on a different object
called line call, that isn't related
to scanner. Now let's say
I wanted to rename line from the
scanner. But I don't want to
like rename all the other line
properties in there. How can
I tell which line is which, so to
speak? That's very, very hard
to do without static typing. But
once you have static typing
in place it's trivial. It's what
the compiler does all day.
So we could for example try to
grab this parser here and put
it down at the bottom.
So we can see this code here.
Here's our scanner.line.
Here's the other reference to .line.
Then let's go back to where
line is declared in the scanner, up
here. Now let's try to rename line.
We'll instead call it line number.
Now when I press enter, you see
one of them renames but not the
other, because we know which one
we're talking about. So if
I undo you can sort of see here,
these guys change but this guy
up here stays the same because
it's a different property that so
happens to have the same name.
Now this is the kind of thing that
makes very large JavaScript
applications very hard to maintain.
That's why Tooling really,
really helps.
Okay, final thing I want
to show is actually that
we can compile the compiler, with
[Laughter]
the compiler. I might go into the
compiler directory and say
compile TypeScript producing
an output file out ts.js.
Also generate a declarations file.
We'll look at that. Then I want
a compile TypeScript.ts, there.
That's going to produce two files
ts.js, which is the compiler
itself and
then it produces a declaration
file for the compiler. So you
see the compiler itself is one megabyte
of JavaScript. Now you
can take that JavaScript file and
run it through your minifiers
and all your other JavaScript tool
chain. But we've also produced
a declaration file that is basically
a summary of the external
interface of the compiler, if
you will. If we start that up
you'll see that, let's grab this
guy and put it up here, so we
can see the whole file,
get rid of this guy.
Here you see the file that we've
generated is basically a summary
of the entire compiler. In here
you see again all of the ASTs
and whatever. But the code bodies
are gone. Now you can take
this declaration file and you can
now continue the next level
of the chain of your modular development.
Where you just treat
the compiler as some component
that you're already done with,
now you're just taking its external
interface. So you can see
how we can automatically generate
these declaration files or
you can hand author them if you're
trying to encapsulate a, or
describe an already existing
JavaScript library.
Okay, so what's included in TypeScript
is an open source compiler
and language service all
written in TypeScript.
We include Tooling for Visual Studio.
That gives you a language
service in VS. But like I said all
of the services that underpin
that are open source and anyone could
use those to produce their
own development experiences. We have
a browser host to playground
that you saw me play with.
Lots of libraries with static typings
of the DOM, jQuery, Node,
etcetera, etcetera, then of course
lots of samples and also a
formal Language Specification.
So as I started out by saying application
scale JavaScript development
is hard. But as I think you've seen
TypeScript makes it easier.
Please check it out at typescriptlang.org
and let us know what you think.
Thank you.